ānandarūpa bhagavannayi te'vatāre
prāpte pradīptabhavadaṅganirīyamāṇai: |
kāntivrajairiva ghanāghanamaṇḍalairdyā-
māvṛṇvatī viruruce kila varṣavelā ||1||
ānanda-rūpa	Bliss personified
bhagavan-ayi	O Lord! Thou
te-avatāre prāpte	(when) Thy incarnation approached
pradīpta-bhavat-aṅga-	lustrous Thy body
nirīyamāṇai:	emanating
kānti-vrajai:-iva	rays of brilliance like
ghanāghana-maṇḍalai:-	by groups of thick dark clouds
dyām-āvṛṇvatī	the skies covering
viruruce kila varṣavelā	shone indeed the rainy season
Thou O Lord! Who are Bliss personified, when the time of Thy incarnation approached, the rainy season indeed shone with the lustre of Thy body, which emanated the blue rays of brilliance on the thick dark clouds that covered the skies.
āśāsu śītalatarāsu payodatoyai-
rāśāsitāptivivaśeṣu ca sajjaneṣu |
naiśākarodayavidhau niśi madhyamāyāṃ
kleśāpahastrijagatāṃ tvamihāvirāsī: ||2||
āśāsu	(when) all the directions
śītalatarāsu	had been cooled well
payodatoyai:-	by the rain waters
āśāsita-	what was desired for
āpti-vivaśeṣu	(when) it was got, overwhelmed (by it)
ca sajjaneṣu	by the good people
naiśākara-udaya-vidhau	and when the moon was rising
niśi madhyamāyāṃ	at midnight
kleśāpaha:- trijagatāṃ	the Remover of the sorrows of the three worlds
tvam-	Thou
iha-āvirāsī:	here ( on this earth) did appear
When all the directions had been well cooled by the rain waters, when the virtuous people were overwhelmed with the joy of the impending fulfillment of their desires, and the moon was rising at midnight, Thou the remover of all sorrows, appeared here on this earth, embodied as Krishna.
bālyaspṛśā'pi vapuṣā dadhuṣā vibhūtī-
rudyatkirīṭakaṭakāṅgadahārabhāsā |
śaṅkhārivārijagadāparibhāsitena
meghāsitena parilesitha sūtigehe ||3||
bālya-spṛśā-api	though in the form of a child
vapuṣā	by body
dadhuṣā vibhūtī:-	Thou adorned the divine majesties
udyat-kirīṭa-	shining crown
kaṭaka-aṅgada-	bracelets, shoulder ornaments
hār bhāsā	beautiful necklace
śaṅkha-ari-	conch, discus
vārija-gadā	lotus mace
paribhāsitena meghāsitena	beautiful like the hue of rain bearing blue clouds
parilesitha	Thou shone
sūti gehe	in the birth chamber
Thou shone in the birth chamber, though in the from of a child, with Thy body adorned with the divine majesties, shining crown, bracelets, shoulder ornaments, beautiful necklace, conch, discus, lotus, mace, beautiful as the hue of the rain bearing clouds.
vakṣa:sthalīsukhanilīnavilāsilakṣmī-
mandākṣalakṣitakaṭākṣavimokṣabhedai: |
tanmandirasya khalakaṃsakṛtāmalakṣmī-
munmārjayanniva virejitha vāsudeva ||4||
vakṣa:-sthalī-	on Thy bosom
sukha-nilīna-	comfortably resting
vilāsi-lakṣmī-	the glorious Lakshmi
manda-akṣa-lakṣita-	casting with shyful eyes
kaṭākṣa-vimokṣa-bhedai:	the side-glances glancing
tat-mandirasya	of that house (the prison)
khala-kaṃsa-kṛtām-alakṣmīm-	the inauspiciousness caused by the evil Kansa
unmārjayan-iva	dispersing away ,as though
virejitha vāsudeva	Thou did shine O Vaasudeva!
O Vaasudeva! Thou did shine in that prison house with the glorious Lakshmi Devi comfortably resting on Thy bosom. The side glances of varied graces, with shyful eyes, cast by her, dispersed away the inauspiciousness of the prison caused by the wicked Kansa.
śauristu dhīramunimaṇḍalacetaso'pi
dūrasthitaṃ vapurudīkṣya nijekṣaṇābhyām ||
ānandavāṣpapulakodgamagadgadārdra-
stuṣṭāva dṛṣṭimakarandarasaṃ bhavantam ||5||
śauri:-tu	Vasudeva indeed,
dhīra-muni-maṇḍala-	the group of sages
cetasa:-api	to their minds also
dūrasthitaṃ	unapproachable
vapu:-udīkṣya	Thy form, on seeing
nija-īkṣaṇābhām	by his own eyes
ānanda-vāṣpa-	(with) tears of joy
pulaka-udgama-	horripilation
gada-gada-ārdra:-	choked and melting voice
tuṣṭāva dṛṣṭi-	sang Thy praises, for the sight (Thou who are)
makaranda-rasam bhavantam	nectar-like as for the bee.
Thy form which is unapproachable to the minds of many aspiring sages, when Vasudeva saw with his own eyes, he had horripilation all over his body, his eyes were full of tears of joy and with a choked and melting voice he sang Thy prises, whose sight is like nectar honey for the bee like eyes.
deva prasīda parapūruṣa tāpavallī-
nirlūnadātrasamanetrakalāvilāsin |
khedānapākuru kṛpāgurubhi: kaṭākṣai-
rityādi tena muditena ciraṃ nuto'bhū: ||6||
deva prasīda	O Lord! Be pleased
parapūruṣa	O Supreme being!
tāpavallī-	the creeper of all sorrows
nirlūna-dātra-sama-	cutting down with sharp sword like
netra-kalā-vilāsin	with playful eyes
khedān-apākuru	remove all sufferings
kṛpā-gurubhi: kaṭākṣai:-	laden with compassion, by the side glances
ityādi tena muditena	thus by him (Vasudeva), who was filled with joy
ciraṃ nuto-abhū:	for a long time, Thou were praised
Thou were praised with prayers for a long time by Vasudeva who was filled with joy, saying that 'O Lord! cut down the creeper of all my sorrows with Thy sharp sword like playful eyes. O Supreme Being! Remove all my sufferings with Thy side glances laden with compassion.'
mātrā ca netrasalilāstṛtagātravalyā
stotrairabhiṣṭutaguṇa: karuṇālayastvam |
prācīnajanmayugalaṃ pratibodhya tābhyāṃ
māturgirā dadhitha mānuṣabālaveṣam ||7||
mātrā ca netra-salila-	and by Thy mother's (Devaki), tears
āstṛta-gātra-valyā	was covered well the body delicate creeper like
stotrai:-abhiṣṭuta-guṇa:	by hymns (Thee whose) excellences were praised
karuṇālaya:- tvam	Thou the abode of mercy
prācīna-janma-yugalaṃ	(about) their two previous births
pratibodhya tābhyāṃ	explained the two of them
mātu:-girā dadhitha	at the request of Thy mother assumed
mānuṣa-bāla-veṣam	the form of a human child
And by Thy mother Devaki's tears whose delicate creeper like body was covered and made wet , Thy excellences were praised by hymns. Thou, the abode of mercy, then explained to them,Thy parents, about their two previous births. Then at the request of Thy mother Devaki, Thou assumed the form of a human infant child.
tvatpreritastadanu nandatanūjayā te
vyatyāsamāracayituṃ sa hi śūrasūnu: |
tvāṃ hastayoradhṛta cittavidhāryamāryai-
rambhoruhasthakalahaṃsakiśoraramyam ||8||
tvat-prerita:-tadanu	by Thee prompted, then
nanda-tanūjayā	with the daughter of Nanda
te vyatyāsam-āracayitum	Thy inter-exchange to carry out
sa hi śūrasūnu:	indeed, he the son of Shoorasena (Vasudeva)
tvāṃ hasthayo:-adhṛta	Thee in his two hands took
citta-vidhāryam-āryai:-	by the minds of the sages conceivable only (as though)
ambhoruha-stha-	on a lotus sitting
kala-haṃsa-kiśora-ramyam	a swan young and beautiful
At Thy prompting, in order to bring about Thy inter-exchanging with the daughter of Nanda, the son of Shoorasena Vasudeva took Thee in his two hands. Thou who can only be conceived in the minds of the sages, in Vasudeva's hands looked like an attractive young swan perched on a lotus.
jātā tadā paśupasadmani yoganidrā |
nidrāvimudritamathākṛta pauralokam |
tvatpreraṇāt kimiva citramacetanairyad-
dvārai: svayaṃ vyaghaṭi saṅghaṭitai: sugāḍham ||9||
jātā tadā	was born then
paśupa-sadmani	in the house of the cowherd (Nanda)
yoga-nidrā	Yoga-Maayaa
nidrā-vimudritam-	in deep slumber
atha-akṛta paura-lokam	thereafter, caused the people of the region
tvat-preraṇāt	at Thy behest
kim-iva citram-	what is so surprising in this
acetanai:-yat-dvārai:	when the inanimate doors
svayaṃ vyaghaṭi	opened by themselves
saṅghaṭitai: sugāḍham	which were closed very well
Thereafter, at Thy behest, Yoga-Maayaa, who was born in the house of Nandagopa, caused all the people in the region to fall into deep slumber. This is not at all surprising, considering that the well locked inanimate doors of the prison opened by themselves.
śeṣeṇa bhūriphaṇavāritavāriṇā'tha
svairaṃ pradarśitapatho maṇidīpitena |
tvāṃ dhārayan sa khalu dhanyatama: pratasthe
so'yaṃ tvamīśa mama nāśaya rogavegān ||10||
śeṣeṇa bhūri-phaṇa-vārita	by Aadi Shesha's many hoods the warded off (waters)
vāriṇā-atha svairam	the waters then comfortably
pradarśita-patha:	led along the way
maṇi-dīpitena	enlightened by the gems (on the hood of Aadi Shesha)
tvāṃ dhārayan	carrying Thee
sa khalu dhanyatama:	indeed he the most blessed one
pratasthe	set out
sa:-ayaṃ tvam-īśa	That This Thou O Lord!
mama nāśaya rogā-vegān	eradicate the force of my ailments
He, Vasudeva, the most blessed one set out carrying Thee in his hands. Aadi Shesha with his many hoods warded off the rain waters and led along the way by him with the gems on his hood s enlightening the way. O Lord! Of such exceeding prowess deign to save me from my forceful ailments.